---
layout: post
title: "LastLeg: Replacing Physical Maps with Low-Friction Directions"
---

<!-- This is the actual text of my blog post. I can use **Markdown** here, and Jekyll will convert it to HTML and inject it into the `{{ content }}` area of the layout we just made.* -->

For the past year, I've spent a lot of time thinking about how we navigate unfamiliar large public spaces, like shopping centers or malls, large venues hosting concerts or expositions, or university campuses. Physical map kiosks can be scattered around places like these, but nowadays, we rely so heavily on our phones for directions. Standing in front of a giant directory trying to sort through shops and trace a path can feel outdated and frustrating.

Interestingly, Apple tried to address this by introducing their Indoor Maps program in 2019. The goal was to bring indoor navigation directly to Apple Maps in iPhones; however, the process for venues to join is incredibly strict. Vendors face high barriers to entry, limiting the feature to places with very high annual visitorship, and get very little dedicated support from Apple once they enroll.

I've decided to try to build a more dedicated, involved alternative. To avoid locally processing graph theory operations, the application sends user coordinates to a GraphHopper server via a REST API. The server computes the shortest path across OpenStreetMap nodes I built, and returns the exact routing data for MapKit to draw. I paired this external logic with a custom layout engine built in SwiftUI. Moving away from standard Apple view constraints and using absolute coordinate tracking allowed me to create an app that matched my vision perfectly.

A major focus of the design was being low-friction and ADA-friendly. Instead of a standard application you have to search for and download, LastLeg runs as an iOS App Clip. You simply scan a code that lets the app know where you are, and it provides personalized directions. The app also includes features to accommodate ADA compliance measures, prioritizing routes with ramps and elevators to make moving around easier for people with disabilities.

Although the version currently being designed works well outdoors and in simple indoor areas, I plan to improve the precise indoor tracking next. I want to integrate cheap iBeacon units to help pinpoint a user's location indoors where GPS signals usually drop, and applying it here could make turn-by-turn indoor directions highly accurate.
